---
title: Ariss
fleqn: true
abstract: Notes for Ariss
---
\newcommand\AA{\mathcal{A}}
\newcommand\RR{\bm{R}}
\newcommand{\Var}{\operatorname{Var}}

A model for _random walk_ has sample space ${\Omega = [0, 1)}$.
The base 2 expansion of ${\omega\in\Omega}$ is ${\omega = \sum_{i>0} \omega_i/2^i}$
where ${\omega_i\in\{0,1\}}$.
Let ${A_{j,n} = [j/2^n, (j + 1)/2^n)}$ and
${\AA_n = \{A_{j,n}\mid 0\le j < 2^n\}}$.

__Exercise__. _Show $\cup_{0\le j < 2^n} A_{j,n} = [0, 1)$_.

_Hint_: If $\omega\in [0, 1)$ then there exists an integer $j$ with ${j\le\omega 2^n < j + 1}$
and ${0\le j < 2^n}$. This shows $\omega\in A_{j,n}$.
We can also write this as $j = \lfloor \omega 2^n\rfloor$, the greatest
integer less than or equal to $\omega 2^n$.

__Exercise__. _Show $A_{j,n}\cap A_{k,n} = \emptyset$ if $j\not=k$_.

_Hint_: Consider $j < k$.

This shows $\AA_n$ is a _partition_ of $\Omega = [0, 1)$.
A partition is used to represent partial information. 
Full information is knowing $\omega\in\Omega$. Partial information
is knowing only which atom $\omega$ belongs to.

Define $X_n\colon\Omega\to\{0,1\}$ by $X_n(\omega) = \omega_n$, to be the $n$-th digit
in the base 2 representation of $\omega$.

__Exercise__. _Show $X_1(\omega) = 1_{[1/2,1)}$_.

__Exercise__. _Show $X_n$ is constant on each atom $A_{j,n}$, $0\le j < n$_.

This implies $X_n$ is _measurable_ with respect to the smallest algebra of
sets generated by the atoms of $\AA_n$, but we prefer this simple definition.
Since $X_n$ is constant on atoms it _is_ a function $X_n\colon\AA_n\to\RR$.
This is useful for computer implementation.

Let $Y_n = 2X_n - 1$ so $Y_n = 1$ when $X_n = 1$ and $Y_n = -1$ when $X_n = 0$.
Random walk is the stochastic process $W_n = Y_1 + \cdots + Y_n$.

__Exercise__. _Show $E[W_n] = 0$ and $\Var(W_n) = n$_.

Let $B_{t,n} = W_{\lfloor tn\rfloor}/\sqrt{n}$.

__Exercise__. _Show $\Var(B_{t,n}) \to t$ as $n\to\infty$_.

_Hint_: $\Var(B_{t,n}) = \lfloor tn\rfloor$.

Brownian motion $B_t$ is the limit as $n\to\infty$ of $B_{t,n}$.
