---
title: Grassmann Algebra
author: Keith A. Lewis
institute: KALX, LLC
classoption: fleqn
fleqn: true
abstract: The algebra of space.
...

\newcommand\dom{\operatorname{dom}}
\newcommand\cod{\operatorname{cod}}
\renewcommand\ker{\operatorname{ker}}
\newcommand\ran{\operatorname{ran}}
\newcommand\Alg{\operatorname{Alg}}
\newcommand\cat[1]{\mathbf{#1}}
\newcommand\mb[1]{\mathbf{#1}}
\newcommand\RR{\mathbf{R}}
\newcommand\GG{\mathcal{G}}
\newcommand\join{\vee}
\newcommand\meet{\wedge}

In the middle of the 19th century [@Gra1844] came up with a simple axiom
to reduce geometric truth to algebra: the product of two points is 0
if and only if the points coincide. René Descartes demonstrated how
to prove results in Euclidean geometry by associating points in space
with numerical coordinates, but Descartes only considered two and three
dimensions.  Grassmann predated Einstein in treating all points in space
on equal footing.  Grassmann's audaciously simple notion also predated the
modern definition of a vector space. Any point in space can be chosen as
an origin and a vector is just the difference of a point with the origin.

Grassmann was a secondary-school teacher who wrote in an abstruse style
that top mathematicians of the time ignored.
It wasn't until [@Peano1888] wrote an exposition of the theory that
his ideas began to gain traction. Peano, like Descartes, only developed
the theory in two and three dimensions but used a notation more
accessible to mathematicians of the time.

## Exterior Product

Grassmann considered the set $E$ of points in a space of any (finite) dimension.
The _Grassmann algebra_ of $E$, $\GG(E)$, is the algebra
generated by the points in $E$ over the real numbers $\RR$ with the axiom $PQ = 0$
if and only if $P = Q$. More precisely, the Grassmann algebra is the quotient algebra
$\GG(E) = \Alg(E)/\Alg(\{PP\mid P\in E\})$.

The (associative) algebra over the real numbers generated by any set $S$, $\Alg(S)$, is defined by

- $\RR\subseteq\Alg(S)$
- $S\subseteq\Alg(S)$
- If $a\in\RR$ and $x\in\Alg(S)$ then $ax = xa\in\Alg(S)$
- If $x,y\in\Alg(S)$ then $x + y = y + x$ and $xy$ are in $\Alg(S)$
- If $x,y,z\in\Alg(S)$ then $x + (y + z) = (x + y) + z$ and $x(yz) = (xy)z$.
- If $a\in\RR$ and $y,z\in\Alg(S)$ then $a(y + z) = ay + az$.
- If $x,y,z\in\Alg(S)$ then $x(y + z) = xy + xz$.
- If $x\in\Alg(S) then $0x = x0 = 0$ and $1x = x1 = x$.

Note that we do not require $xy = yx$. The associativity of
addition and multiplication
allows writing $x + y + z$ and $xyz$ unambiguously.

__Exercise__. _Show if $x\in\Alg(\{PP\mid P\in E\})$ and $y\in\Alg(S)$
then $xy$ and $yx$ are in $Alg(\{PP\mid P\in E\})$_.

This shows $\Alg(\{PP\mid P\in E\})$ is a two-sided ideal of $\Alg(S)$ so the quotient
space $\GG(E)$ is well defined.

The product in $\GG(E)$ is Grassmann's _exterior product_. 
Italian differential geometers decided to
call it the _wedge product_, written as $P\wedge Q$.
This was an unfortunate historical accident.
The exterior product is analogous to a union of sets so $P\vee Q$ is
a more appropriate notation. Grassmann's regressive product, defined below,
is analogous to the intersection of sets so $P\wedge Q$ would be
the natural notation for that.

## Examples

Before introducing the general theory let's consider some simple examples.

__Exercise__. _Prove $PQ = -QP$ for $P,Q\in E$_.

_Hint_: Use $(P + Q)(P + Q) = 0$.

The product $PQ$ represents the oriented line determined
by $P$ and $Q$ when $P\not=Q$.
We can interpret $aP + bQ$ as the point
having weight $a + b$ that is the barycentre of $aP$ and $bQ$.

Let $R(t) = P + t(Q - P) = (1 - t)P + t Q$, $t\in R$.
Note $R(t)$ has weight 1, $R(0) = P$, and $R(1) = Q$.

__Exercise__ _Show $PQR(t) = 0$ for $t\in\RR$_.

_Hint_: $PQR(t) = PQ((1 - t)P + tQ)$.

This is an example of incidence involve three points. It indicates $R(t)$
meets the line determined by $P$ and $Q$ for all $t\in\RR$ if $P\not=Q$.

__Exercise__ _Show $Q - P\not= R(t)$ for any $t\in\RR$_.

Since $R(t)/t = (1/t - 1)P + Q$ and $1/t - 1$ tends to $-1$ as $t$ goes
to infinity, we can think of $Q - P$ as a point at infinity with $0$
weight.  It represents the _vector_ from $P$ to $Q$. We can interpret
$R(t) = P + t(Q - P)$ as the point from $P$ along the vector $Q - P$
with length $t$.

Note $PQ(Q - P) = 0$.

__Exercise__. _Show $\frac{(Q - P)Q}{PQ} = -1$ and $\frac{P(Q - P)}{PQ} = 1$_.

If $PQ = tST$ where $t\in\RR$ and $P,Q,S,T\in\GG(E)$ we say $PQ$ and $ST$ are
congruent and write ${\frac{PQ}{ST}} = t$.

__Exercise__. _For any $R$ with $PQR = 0$ and $PQ\not=0$ we have $R = (PR/PQ)P + (RQ/PQ)Q$_.

_Hint_: If $R = aP + bQ$ then $PR = bPQ$ and $QR = aQP$.

This is an example of coordinate-free calculation using the Grassmann algebra.

David Hilbert noticed Euclid's axioms were insufficient to determine when
a point lies between two points. Using Grassmann algebra we can define $R$
is between $P$ and $Q$ if and only if $PQR = 0$, $PR/PQ > 0$, and $RQ/PQ < 1$.

A classical result from Euclidean geometry is the three medians of
a triangle meet at the same point. A _median_ is the line from
a vertex of a triangle to the midpoint of the opposite side.

Three points $P,Q,R\in E$ determine a triangle.
The midpoint of $PQ$ is ${(1/2)(P + Q)}$ and
${(1/2)(P + Q)R}$ is the _median_ from
the midpoint of $P$ and $Q$ to $R$.
The _centroid_ $(1/3)(P + Q + R)$ lies on the median.

__Exercise__. _Show $(P + Q)R(P + Q + R) = 0$_.

Replacing $P,Q,R$ with $Q,R,P$ and $R,P,Q$ shows all medians of a triangle meet at the centroid.

## Higher Dimensions

Grassmann's algebra works in any number of dimensions.
Any non-zero product of points is an _extensor_ (also called a _blade_, or _flag_).
The number of points is the _order_ of the extensor.

### Congruence

If $P_0\cdots P_k = tQ_0\cdots Q_k$ for some non-zero $t\in\RR$ then
write $P_0\cdots P_k/Q_0\cdots Q_k = t$ and say the
extensor are _congruent_.

__Exercise__. _Show if $P_0\cdots P_j$ and $Q_0\cdots Q_k$ are congruent
then $j = k$_.

If two extensors are congruent then they have the same order.

## Independence

The points $P_0,\ldots,P_k$ are _independent_ if $P_0\cdots P_k\not=0$.

__Lemma__. _If $P_0,\ldots,P_k$ are independent and
$\sum_j a_j P_j = 0$ for some $a_j\in\RR$ then $a_i = 0$ for $0\le i\le k$_.

_Proof_. Multiply both sides by the product of $\Pi_{j\not=i} P_j$.
This results in $\pm a_i P_0\cdots P_k = 0$ so $a_i = 0$ for all $0\le i\le k$.

If $P_0\cdots P_k=0$ we say $P_0,\ldots,P_k$ are _dependent_.

__Lemma__. _If $P_0,\ldots,P_k$ are dependent then there exists $i$ 
and $a_j\in\RR$, $j\not=i$, with
$P_i = \sum_{j\not=i} a_jP_j$_.

__Exercise__. _Show if $P_0\cdots P_nR = 0$ and $P_0\cdots P_n\not=0$ then
$R = \sum_0^n (P_0\cdots R\cdots P_n/P_0\cdots P_n)P_i$ where
$P_i$ is replaced by $R$ in the coefficients of the sum_.

The smallest convex set containing $P_0,\ldots,P_n$
is $\{\sum_i t_i P_i\mid t_i\ge0,\sum_i t_i = 1\}$.
The above exercise show $R$ belongs to the convex hull of the points if and only if
all coefficients in the sum are non-negative.

### Descartes

Rene Descartes invented a method to reduce the straightedge and compass constructions of Euclid
to algebraic computation by using a _coordinate system_. Although Descartes only
considered two and three dimensional space, any point in $n$-dimensional space $\RR^n$
can be described by a tuple $(x_1,\ldots,x_n)$ where $x_i\in\RR$, $1\le i\le n$.
In _La Géométrie_ (1637), Descartes showed any length constructed from a unit length
must come from a finite sequence of additions, subtractions, multiplications, 
divisions, and square roots. A famous problem from antiquity is "squaring the circle":
given a circle construct a square having the same area. This is equivalent
to constructing $\sqrt{\pi}$. It took 245 years until
[@Lindemann1882] showed $\pi$ is not the root of any non-zero polynomial (transcendental)
when Descartes result can be used to prove squaring the circle was impossible using Euclidean geometry.

__Exercise__. _Show if $x\in\RR$ is transcendental then so is $\sqrt{x}$_.

## Regressive Product


